copy help.help                   newhelp.help
copy help.bad                    newhelp.bad
copy help.send                   newhelp.send
copy help.read-me                newhelp.read-me
copy help.delete                 newhelp.delete
copy help.mail                   newhelp.mail
copy help.type                   newhelp.type
copy help.finish                 newhelp.finish
copy help.null                   newhelp.null
copy help.terminal               newhelp.terminal
copy help.print                  newhelp.print
copy help.undelete               newhelp.undelete
copy help.reply                  newhelp.reply
copy help.group                  newhelp.group
copy help.new                    newhelp.new
copy help.next                   newhelp.next
copy help.select                 newhelp.select
copy help.syntax                 newhelp.syntax
copy help.lookat                 newhelp.lookat
copy help.testing                newhelp.testing
copy help.fullscreen             newhelp.fullscreen
copy help.public                 newhelp.public
copy help.private                newhelp.private
copy help.mbox                   newhelp.mbox
copy help.old-new                newhelp.old-new
copy help.forward                newhelp.forward
copy help.create                 newhelp.create


